BUD-07 Paid storage (#29)
hzrd149/blossom: buds/07.md

- [PUT /upload](./02.md#put-upload---upload-blob)
- [HEAD /<sha256>](./01.md#head-sha256---has-blob)
- [GET /<sha256>](./01.md#get-sha256---get-blob)

When payment is required, the server MUST include one or more `X-{payment_method}` header(s), each corresponding to a supported payment method.

## Server headers

The 402 status code and `X-{payment_method}` header is used by the server to inform the client that a payment is required for the requested operation. The server MUST provide specific headers for each supported payment method.

Supported payment methods:

- `X-Cashu`: Payment details for the cashu payment method, adhering to the [NUT-18](https://github.com/cashubtc/nuts/blob/main/18.md) standard.
- `X-Lightning`: Payment details for the lightning payment method, adhering to the [BOLT-11](https://github.com/lightning/bolts/blob/master/11-payment-encoding.md) standard.

If a server supports multiple payment methods, it MAY send multiple `X-{payment_method}` headers in the same response.

Schema:

```http
HTTP/1.1 402 Payment Required
X-{payment_method}: "<encoded_payload_according_to_{payment_method}_spec>"
```

### `X-Cashu` Header

> When using the X-Cashu header, the server MUST adhere to the [NUT-18](https://github.com/cashubtc/nuts/blob/main/18.md) standard.

Reviewer: ```suggestion 
When using cache for requesting payment for an endpoint, the server MUST respond with a `X-Cashu` header containing a base64 encoded JSON object (payment request)

The payment request should contain an `amount`, `mints`, `unit`, and `pubkey` fields

 - `amount` The amount of ecash being requested
 - `mints` An array of mints that this server uses
 - `unit` The cashu `unit` from the `mints`
 - `pubkey` (optional) a 33 byte pubkey to lock the tokens too. see [NUT-11](https://github.com/cashubtc/nuts/blob/main/11.md)

For example:
\`\`\`json
{
  "amount": 21,
  "unit": "sats",
  "mints": ["https://mint.minibits.cash/Bitcoin"],
  "pubkey": "02a82ec539a2bbd51039c480e8836316036ccb461b9a2e62b49b418c2897851b98"
}
\`\`\`

Would be encoded into

\`\`\`http	
HTTP/1.1 402 Payment Required
X-Cashu: eyJhbW91bnQiOiAyMSwidW5pdCI6ICJzYXRzIiwibWludHMiOiBbImh0dHBzOi8vbWludC5taW5pYml0cy5jYXNoL0JpdGNvaW4iXSwicHVia2V5IjogIjAyYTgyZWM1MzlhMmJiZDUxMDM5YzQ4MGU4ODM2MzE2MDM2Y2NiNDYxYjlhMmU2MmI0OWI0MThjMjg5Nzg1MWI5OCJ9
\`\`\`

```

Reviewer: Finally starting this discussion, I think the `X-Cashu` header from the server should be a base64 encoded JSON object instead of a NIP-18 payment request

The reason is because NIP-18 requires a transport method (http post, or nostr) and has no concept of paying the request using the same method that the request was delivered in

Also the format and encoding benefits of NIP-18 are geared towards showing the payment request to the user as a QRCode, but the primary use case of the `X-Cashu` header is clients and machines automatically responding with a payment in-band

Reviewer: Closing because https://github.com/cashubtc/nuts/pull/239 defines how http 402 should be handled with x-cashu

> When using the X-Cashu header, the server MUST adhere to the [NUT-18](https://github.com/cashubtc/nuts/blob/main/18.md) standard.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When using the X-Cashu header, the server MUST adhere to the [NUT-23](https://github.com/cashubtc/nuts/pull/239) standard.
```

Reviewer: Update to use NUT-23 HTTP Payment required

X-Cashu: creqApWF0gaNhdGVub3N0cmFheKlucHJvZmlsZTFxeTI4d3VtbjhnaGo3dW45ZDNzaGp0bnl2OWtoMnVld2Q5aHN6OW1od2RlbjV0ZTB3ZmprY2N0ZTljdXJ4dmVuOWVlaHFjdHJ2NWhzenJ0aHdkZW41dGUwZGVoaHh0bnZkYWtxcWd5ZGFxeTdjdXJrNDM5eWtwdGt5c3Y3dWRoZGh1NjhzdWNtMjk1YWtxZWZkZWhrZjBkNDk1Y3d1bmw1YWeBgmFuYjE3YWloYjdhOTAxNzZhYQphdWNzYXRhbYF4Imh0dHBzOi8vbm9mZWVzLnRlc3RudXQuY2FzaHUuc3BhY2U
```

### `X-Lightning` Header

When using the X-Lightning header, the server MUST adhere to the [BOLT-11](https://github.com/lightning/bolts/blob/master/11-payment-encoding.md) standard.
Example for lightning:

```http
HTTP/1.1 402 Payment Required
X-Lightning: lnbc30n1pnnmw3lpp57727jjq8zxctahfavqacymellq56l70f7lwfkmhxfjva6dgul2zqhp5w48l28v60yvythn6qvnpq0lez54422a042yaw4kq8arvd68a6n7qcqzzsxqyz5vqsp5sqezejdfaxx5hge83tf59a50h6gagwah59fjn9mw2d5mn278jkys9qxpqysgqt2q2lhjl9kgfaqz864mhlsspftzdyr642lf3zdt6ljqj6wmathdhtgcn0e6f4ym34jl0qkt6gwnllygvzkhdlpq64c6yv3rta2hyzlqp8k28pz
```

### Client implementation

Clients MUST parse and validate all available `X-{payment_method}` headers received from the server. The client SHOULD provide a way for the user to complete the payment and retry the request using the same `X-{payment_method}` header.

> The client MUST provide the payment proof in the request headers using the same `X-{payment_method}` header that was chosen. The payment proof MUST aling with the payment method specification:

Author: Something like this?

**Special Note on HEAD Requests**

The HEAD endpoints are only used to retrieve blob or server information. They MUST NOT be retried with payment proof. Instead, clients should complete the payment and proceed with the `PUT` or `GET` request.

- For cashu the payment proof should be a serialized cashu token according to [NUT-00](https://github.com/cashubtc/nuts/blob/main/00.md#v4-tokens).
- For lightning the payment proof should be the preimage of the payment request according to [BOLT-11](https://github.com/lightning/bolts/blob/master/11-payment-encoding.md).

Schema:
  
```http
X-{payment_method}: "<encoded_payment_proof_according_to_{payment_method}_spec>"
```

Example for Cashu:

```http
X-Cashu: cashuBo2F0gqJhaUgA_9SLj17PgGFwgaNhYQFhc3hAYWNjMTI0MzVlN2I4NDg0YzNjZjE4NTAxNDkyMThhZjkwZjcxNmE1MmJmNGE1ZWQzNDdlNDhlY2MxM2Y3NzM4OGFjWCECRFODGd5IXVW
```

Example for Lightning:

```http
X-Lightning: "966fcb8f153339372f9a187f725384ff4ceae0047c25b9ce607488d7c7e93bba"
```

> ### Recurring Payments

Author: I always end up thinking about a GET /info endpoint where general server characteristics could be indicated. But of course, this would be another BUD. We could leave this section with just a note stating that recurring payments are not yet implemented, thoughts?

> ### Recurring Payments

Author: Removed this section.

Servers MAY accept recurring payments for blob storage using the following Nostr event types:

- **Cashu**: Using [NIP-61](https://github.com/nostr-protocol/nips/blob/master/61.md) standard.

- **Lightning**: Using [NIP-57](https://github.com/nostr-protocol/nips/blob/master/57.md) standard.

The event MUST include a custom `x` tag containing the hash of the blob being paid for.

- `x`: A string that represents the blob's SHA-256 hash.

### Error handling

> If the client fails to provide the payment proof (expired invoice, invalid token, etc.) the server MUST respond with **402 Payment Required** status code and include the relevant `X-{payment_method}` header(s) with updated payment details.

Author: Something like this?

### Error handling

If the client fails to provide the payment proof (expired invoice, invalid token, etc.) the server MUST respond with **400 Bad request** status code and include a `X-Reason` header with a human-readable message. The client SHOULD inform the user about the error and provide a way to retry the request.

Schema:
  
```http
X-{payment_method}: "<encoded_payment_proof_according_to_{payment_method}_spec>"
```

Example for Cashu:

```http
X-Cashu: cashuBo2F0gqJhaUgA_9SLj17PgGFwgaNhYQFhc3hAYWNjMTI0MzVlN2I4NDg0YzNjZjE4NTAxNDkyMThhZjkwZjcxNmE1MmJmNGE1ZWQzNDdlNDhlY2MxM2Y3NzM4OGFjWCECRFODGd5IXVW
```

Example for Lightning:

```http
X-Lightning: "966fcb8f153339372f9a187f725384ff4ceae0047c25b9ce607488d7c7e93bba"
```

**Special Note on HEAD Requests**

The HEAD endpoints are only used to retrieve blob or server information. They MUST NOT be retried with payment proof. Instead, clients should complete the payment and proceed with the `PUT` or `GET` request.

### Recurring Payments

Servers MAY accept recurring payments for blob storage using the following Nostr event types:

- **Cashu**: Using [NIP-61](https://github.com/nostr-protocol/nips/blob/master/61.md) standard.

- **Lightning**: Using [NIP-57](https://github.com/nostr-protocol/nips/blob/master/57.md) standard.

The event MUST include a custom `x` tag containing the hash of the blob being paid for.

- `x`: A string that represents the blob's SHA-256 hash.

### Error handling

> If the client fails to provide the payment proof (expired invoice, invalid token, etc.) the server MUST respond with **400 Bad request** status code and include a `X-Reason` header with a human-readable message. The client SHOULD inform the user about the error and provide a way to retry the request.

Author: @hzrd149, what do you think about this?

> If the client fails to provide the payment proof (expired invoice, invalid token, etc.) the server MUST respond with **400 Bad request** status code and include a `X-Reason` header with a human-readable message. The client SHOULD inform the user about the error and provide a way to retry the request.

Author: If it’s okay with everyone, I’ll leave the status as 400 for now.

Schema:

```http
Www-Authenticate: L402 macaroon="<macaroon>",preimage="<preimage>"
```

Example:

```http
Www-Authenticate: L402 macaroon="eyJJRCI6IjMyMGQyMDAwZjVjODQ0NmQ3OTgyMjBlYTMxOGY5ZDg0MmM5MWZkMjYyMTliODZhYWE2ODEzMDBjYjc4YTI2YWEiLCJ2ZXJzaW9uIjoiMCIsInBheW1lbnRfaGFzaCI6IjQzN2Q2YTg1Y2M2ZDQxMzNiYWIzZTEwNWM0NjViZjMzNTQ4ODNjNmVkNzNkZmFhODA3MDQ1ZmIyMTI4MTRmMjYiLCJ0b2tlbl9pZCI6IjExMzIiLCJsb2NhdGlvbiI6Ii9hcGkvdjIvbWVkaWEvNjZiMGU3NzFlYTM0ZDE0MTBkNTM4Nzk3MjQ0NGRiN2RkNjU3OGE5OTBhZDhmMjRjZjFiZTE1OWUwYmVkODdmYy8wNmQwM2FmYzJjZTJkYzY2ODUxMjFmNTFhZjM5ZDUyNjM2OWY5NjgyZTFhOWNiNGRiZGFlZDhlOWI1ZTJiNDI3Lm1wNCIsImNhdmVhdHMiOlsiIl19",preimage="3e590d1336f241e858359c865802b4883ca91d47379c840af66785e2143bad22"
```

### Unpaid Uploads

Some servers `MAY` accept unpaid uploads and require payment after the upload is completed. In this case, the server `MUST` return a **402 Payment Required** status code along with a `Www-Authenticate` header containing the macaroon and payment request fields using the [L402 protocol](https://github.com/lightninglabs/L402) for the endpoints described in [#payment-required](#payment-required).

> For backward compatibility, the server `SHOULD` display a QR code, JSON file, or other useful information instead of the blob in the response body. When the payment is completed, the server `MUST` replace this information with the actual uploaded file. 

Author: I agree with you that the line about how the server handles serving a blob when payment isn't complete doesn't seem too useful, as this behavior can vary widely depending on the server's implementation. The server could choose to serve the blob for a day, a week, or require periodic payments—the possibilities are indeed endless, so listing them here does seem unnecessary.

However, I do find the backward compatibility section quite useful. One potential approach for showing a paid blob to clients that haven't yet adapted to this BUD, informing the client that the full content is available but requires payment. This way, older clients still receive a meaningful response, even if they don't support the new payment-based logic, while updated clients can fully leverage the payment mechanism.

> For backward compatibility, the server `SHOULD` display a QR code, JSON file, or other useful information instead of the blob in the response body. When the payment is completed, the server `MUST` replace this information with the actual uploaded file. 

Author: I'm fine with that
